REGRESSION EXPLAINER — ELI5 NOTES
===================================

WHAT IS A REGRESSION?
---------------------

You have 50,000 HDB flats that sold in the last 2 years. Each one sold for a specific price. You want to figure out what makes some flats sell for more than others.

The regression is basically saying: "Give me a formula that predicts the price of any flat, using things I know about it."

The simplest version:

  Predicted price = some base number + adjustments for each thing we know

For example: start at $500K, then add $5,000 for each floor up, subtract $16,000 for each km from CBD, etc. The formula finds the best numbers to fill in so the predictions are as close to the real prices as possible.

The R-squared (0.90) means: 90% of why flats sell for different prices can be explained by the variables in our formula. The remaining 10% is stuff we can't measure -- renovation, view, the seller's desperation, etc.


HOW WE BUILT THE MODEL IN STAGES
----------------------------------

We didn't throw everything into the formula at once. We added variables in groups, one at a time, to see how much each group improves the predictions.

Step 1: Where is the flat? (Town + flat type)
Just knowing "it's a 4-room in Bishan" vs "a 3-room in Woodlands" already explains 63% of price differences. Location is the single biggest thing.

Step 2: How big and how high? (Floor area + storey)
Adding size and floor bumps us to 72%.

Step 3: How much lease is left? (Remaining lease)
Big jump -- from 72% to 85.6%. A flat with 90 years left is worth much more than one with 50 years left, even if everything else is the same.

Step 4: What design era? (Flat model -- DBSS, Maisonette, etc.)
Some designs are more desirable. Now at 87.2%.

Steps 5-7: Geography + feng shui + superstition
Distances to MRT, hawker, columbarium, temple; price digits, block 4, CNY. Each adds a little more. Now at 89.3%.

Step 8: Month fixed effects
Prices rose during the 2-year window, so controlling for when it sold matters. Final: 90.2%.

At each step, we ran a statistical test (ANOVA) that checks whether the improvement is real or just by chance. Every addition passed.


WHAT IS ANOVA?
--------------

ANOVA asks: "Did the model actually get better, or did it just get more complicated?"

When you add new variables to a formula, R-squared will always go up -- even if you add random nonsense. More variables = more chances to fit the data, even by accident.

ANOVA compares the simpler model (before) and the richer model (after) and asks: "Is the improvement big enough that it's extremely unlikely to have happened by chance?"

If yes (p < 0.05), the new variables genuinely help. If not, they're just adding complexity without improving predictions -- drop them.

Example from our work: the superstition variables improved R-squared by only 0.001. Looks like noise. But ANOVA said: no, even this small improvement is statistically real (p < 0.05), because with 50,000 transactions we can detect even small genuine effects.

Why do we need ANOVA when regression already gives p-values?

The regression p-values tell you about individual variables -- is this one variable significant? ANOVA tells you about groups of variables together -- did this whole batch improve the model?

Say you add 10 superstition variables at once. Individually, maybe 3 are significant and 7 aren't. The regression p-values tell you which ones. But ANOVA answers: "Should I have bothered with superstition at all?" Maybe those 3 significant ones are only significant by chance because you tested 10 things.


WHAT IS A P-VALUE?
------------------

The p-value answers: "If this variable actually had zero effect on price, how likely is it that I'd see a result this strong just by coincidence?"

Example: block_has_4 has p < 0.0000000000000002 (the "< 2.2e-16" in the table). That means: if blocks with 4 in the number had genuinely no effect on price, the chance of seeing a $10,133 discount this consistent across 50,000 transactions is essentially zero. So we're confident the effect is real.

Counter-example: num_fours_tail had p = 0.33. That means: even if 4s in trailing price digits had zero real effect, there's a 33% chance you'd see a result this size from random noise. Too high to trust, so we dropped it.

The threshold is p < 0.05 -- less than a 5% chance the result is a fluke. Everything in Model 10 clears that bar.

The catch with large samples: With 50,000 transactions, even tiny effects become statistically significant. The superstition variables add only 0.2% to R-squared -- barely anything -- but they clear p < 0.05 easily. Statistically real doesn't mean practically important. That's why we report both the p-value (is it real?) and the R-squared contribution (does it matter?).


WHAT ARE ROBUST STANDARD ERRORS?
---------------------------------

Standard errors tell you how much your coefficient might wobble if you ran the same regression on a different sample of 50,000 flats. Small standard error = stable estimate. Large = could change a lot.

Regular standard errors assume the model's prediction errors are roughly the same size everywhere -- a $200K flat and a $1.5M flat would have similar-sized errors. That assumption is wrong for housing data. Expensive flats have much bigger prediction errors (a penthouse might sell for $200K above or below prediction, while a 2-room flat is only $20K off).

Robust standard errors fix this. They say: "I won't assume the errors are the same size everywhere -- I'll calculate the standard errors based on how the errors actually behave in the data."

What changes: The coefficients stay exactly the same. Only the standard errors (and therefore the p-values) change. Usually they get a bit larger, which means some borderline-significant variables might become insignificant. Everything in Model 10 stayed significant even with robust standard errors, which is reassuring.

In one sentence for Mohan: "I used robust standard errors because price variance is larger for expensive flats, and I wanted the p-values to account for that."

How we did it in practice: It's not a separate test. It's baked into how we ran the regression. In R:

  coeftest(model10, vcov = vcovHC(model10, type = "HC1"))

- model10 is the regression with regular standard errors
- vcovHC(..., type = "HC1") recalculates the standard errors using the robust method -- it looks at the actual pattern of errors instead of assuming they're uniform
- coeftest reprints the coefficient table with the corrected standard errors

So every p-value in our table already uses robust standard errors. It's not a pass/fail test -- it's more like putting on corrective lenses before reading the results. Same data, same coefficients, just a more honest view of how precise they are.


WHY DO WE ASSUME THERE ARE ERRORS?
------------------------------------

There are always errors. Every regression has them -- they're not a flaw in the work, they're a fact of life.

The "error" (also called "residual") is just the gap between what the model predicts and what actually happened. The model predicts a flat should sell for $500K. It actually sold for $530K. That $30K gap is the error.

Why does the gap exist? Because no formula can perfectly predict every flat's price. Two identical flats in the same block can sell for different prices because:
- One was freshly renovated, the other wasn't
- One has an unblocked view, the other faces a wall
- One seller was desperate, the other could wait
- The buyer fell in love with the flat and paid more
- Pure randomness in negotiation

We don't have data on any of those things. So the model does its best with what it has (location, size, floor, lease, etc.) and the leftover gap is the error. 90% R-squared means the formula captures 90% of price variation. The other 10% is the errors -- stuff we can't measure.

The robust standard errors question is about whether those errors follow a neat pattern or a messy one. Housing errors are messy (bigger errors for expensive flats), so we adjust for that.

Did we find bigger standard errors? Not exactly -- we didn't discover a problem. We expected it and used a method that accounts for it upfront.

- Regular standard errors assume prediction errors are the same size for a $200K flat and a $1.5M flat.
- Robust standard errors don't assume anything -- they look at the actual errors.

In practice, the robust standard errors came out slightly larger than the regular ones. That means the regular method was being slightly overconfident. But the difference was small -- nothing significant became insignificant. It didn't change conclusions, just made them more defensible.

Think of it like wearing a seatbelt. You don't wear it because you found a crash -- you wear it because crashes happen. With housing data, you always use robust standard errors because expensive properties have noisier prices.


WHY LOG PRICE MAKES MORE SENSE
--------------------------------

Say two flats are both predicted wrong by $50,000:

- Flat A costs $200,000, predicted $250,000 -- that's a 25% miss
- Flat B costs $1,500,000, predicted $1,550,000 -- that's a 3% miss

The raw model treats both as equally wrong ($50K off). But that's clearly not true -- the $200K flat prediction is way worse.

The log model works on percentages, so it says: "being 25% off is much worse than 3% off." It tries harder to get the cheap flats right, and doesn't waste effort chasing $50K precision on a $1.5M flat where that's just rounding error.

That's why it's more accurate overall -- it cares about proportional errors, which is how humans actually think about prices.

Another benefit: the log model can never predict a negative price (because exp(anything) > 0). Our raw model predicted -$1,065 for one flat in Changi Village. The log model predicted $230K for the same flat -- still wrong (heritage premium we can't measure) but at least a real number.

The trade-off: coefficients are in percentages, not dollars. "Each floor adds 0.7%" instead of "$5,399." Less punchy for a story. That's why we used raw price for the main model but tested log as a robustness check. The findings are the same either way.


FAQ
---------------------------------

"Why only 2 years of data?"
Because the relationship between variables and price changes over time. Policy changes (cooling measures, TDSR, lease decay warnings) shift how the market works. Pooling 35 years would average across different markets and the coefficients would describe none of them.

"Why raw price instead of log price?"
So the coefficients are in dollars. "Each floor up adds $5,399" is easier to explain than "each floor up adds 0.8% to price." The trade-off is that the model is less precise at the extremes.

"Isn't 90% R-squared suspiciously high?"
Not for housing. Location alone explains 63%. Flats are a standardised product (unlike, say, paintings or used cars), so a few variables go a long way. The remaining 10% is the stuff that makes each flat unique -- view, renovation, seller urgency.

"How do you know correlation isn't causation?"
You don't. The whole model is associational. "Blocks with 4 sell for less" doesn't prove the number 4 caused it -- maybe those blocks happen to be older or in worse locations. But we controlled for location, age, size, floor, and lease, and the effect persists. That's as close as observational data gets.

"What's the weakest part?"
The price-digit variables (8s, 168). Sellers choose those numbers, so the coefficient might reflect seller savviness rather than the number itself. The feng shui variables (columbarium, temple distance) are stronger because nobody chooses how far their flat is from a columbarium.